1. What does ioctl() allow that read() and write() do not?

The ioctl() function allows device-specific control operations that cannot be handled by read() or write().

The read() and write() functions are only used for transferring data between user space and the device.

ioctl() is used to configure, control, or query device settings.

Example:

read() reads data from the device

write() writes data to the device

ioctl() sets baud rate, changes mode, resets device, etc.




2. Why do we need copy_to_user() or copy_from_user()?

User space and kernel space are two separate memory regions for safety and protection.

The kernel cannot directly access pointers from user space.

Therefore, special functions are needed to safely copy data between user space and kernel space.

copy_from_user() copies data from user space to kernel space.

copy_to_user() copies data from kernel space to user space.

These functions also handle memory access violations and page faults safely.





3. What does _IO vs _IOR mean?

These are macros used to define ioctl command numbers.

They indicate the direction of data transfer between the user and the kernel.

_IO means no data transfer (simple command).

_IOR means data is copied from kernel to user (read).

_IOW means data is copied from user to kernel (write).

_IOWR means data is transferred in both directions (read and write).





4. What happens if the user passes an invalid cmd?

If the command (cmd) passed by the user is not recognized by the driver, the ioctl function should return -ENOTTY.

-ENOTTY stands for “Inappropriate ioctl for device”.

This return value tells the system that the command is invalid.

The kernel does not crash, it simply reports the error and ignores the command.

Example code:

switch (cmd) {
    case MY_IOCTL_CMD:
        // handle command
        break;
    default:
        return -ENOTTY;
}






5. Why is thread-safety still important in ioctl()?

Multiple threads or processes can call ioctl() on the same device at the same time.

If shared variables or hardware registers are accessed without synchronization, race conditions may occur.

Race conditions can cause data corruption or unpredictable behavior.

To avoid this, synchronization mechanisms like mutexes, spinlocks, or atomic variables should be used in the ioctl() implementation.